Here's a clinical scenario.
We'll be following along with our patient, Mr. Jones.
Mr. Jones has a nasty cough and decides to visit his primary care doctor.
After the doctor performs a thorough history and physical exam,
he decides to order a chest radiograph,
colloquially known as a chest X-ray to see if Mr. Jones has pneumonia.
Mr. Jones gets imaged and the radiograph is reviewed by a radiologist,
who reports back that there is no evidence of pneumonia or other concerning finding.
With this information in hand,
the primary care doctor gives Mr. Jones attentive
diagnosis of viral bronchitis and tells Mr. Jones to rest up,
stay hydrated and report back if the cough doesn't subside in a week or two.
All is well and a year goes by.
Mr. Jones has a new cough,
but this one has been lingering for some time
and he now notices some blood in the tissue paper.
He visits his primary care doctor again,
who eventually decides to get a follow-up chest radiograph.
This time the radiologists notes a new nodule,
which requires further evaluation.
Here are the two studies side-by-side for comparison.
We can see here,
this density that was not there before.
Following the radiologist's recommendations,
the primary care doctor orders a CT to further characterize the nodule.
Here are two images from the same CT,
one in the coronal plane as if the patient was facing us and one in the axial plane,
a transverse cross section of the patient.
We again see the nodule, but to the trained eye,
we now observe some additional concerning features.
For example, these small spicules,
which increase the probability that the nodule is cancer.
Here's the chest radiograph and CT side-by-side to
see how much more distinctly the finding appears on CT.
Given the concerning findings,
the primary care doctor refers Mr. Jones to a lung specialist, pulmonologist.
The pulmonologist agrees the nodule is suspicious for cancer and orders a PET exam,
to both further assess the nodule as well as
see if there are any other involved areas of the body.
Here we see on the PET-CT on the right that the nodule is lighting up,
indicating it is avidly taking up a radio labeled sugar called fluorodeoxyglucose.
Though while not definitive for cancer,
this further increases the probability that it is.
No additional areas involvement were seen.
With this information at hand,
Mr. Jones moves onto the definitive diagnostic study,
which is a biopsy and subsequent review by a pathologists.
He's referred to an interventional radiologists.
The interventional radiologists will use intra-procedural CT images
to guide his needle to the correct location and ensure an adequate biopsy.
We see on these images,
the needle at the target confirming an adequate location to sample.
The sample is subsequently taken and sent to a pathologists
who under microscopic review confirms the diagnosis of cancer.
Mr. Jones is then referred to a cancer specialist known as an oncologist.
The oncologist discusses the treatment plan with Mr.
Jones and explains to him that he would like to get
follow-up CTs at regular intervals
to see if the cancer is responding to the treatment regimen.
Here we see images taken over time in which we see
an initial increase in the size of
the nodule pre-treatment and then subsequent stability.
Serial imaging using CT or MRI is very common in cancer care
as well as in the assessment of other diseases which have a long-term course.
So that concludes our clinical scenario.
There are just a few more used cases I want to touch
on that were not captured in the clinical example.
Not infrequently, advanced imaging studies are obtained to provide
supplementary information to a confirmed or highly probable diagnosis.
In these cases, the diagnosis may be clinical,
meaning that it's based on the grounds of history,
physical exam and non-imaging tests alone.
However, the information gained from imaging studies can refine the diagnosis
and more precisely estimate the severity of
disease or attempt to predict future progression.
One such example is in dementia.
In patients with clinically suspected Alzheimer's dementia,
volumetric MRI with quantification of key brain regions can be used to more precisely
estimate the severity of disease or identify
any additional contributing factors to the patient's memory loss.
One of the brain regions of particular importance is the hippocampus and as a structure,
you will get some hands-on experienced segmenting in the final project.
Medical imaging can also be used to guide therapy,
but in a different way than we've seen with surgical or procedural guidance.
Rather, the images can be used to plan radiation therapy fields.
Radiation therapy has several uses,
however, the most common use is in the treatment of cancers.
CT or MRI is often used to contour regions of interests,
planning the distribution and quantity of radiation precisely,
while selecting which critical structures to avoid.